# Information 

**xzv8**: Before I dig deeper into other topics, we need to cover the most fundamental issue that is slowing your emancipation, fuelling many conflicts and used to destabilize democracies, social cohesion and help your financial elite concentrate wealth more and more, draining the majority in the process. And based on our analysis of problems in our past, most of these issues are directly related to the way you perceive computing, software in particular. 

**jht**: wow, I did not expect this to be our most critical problem, not by a long shot. So if I understand you correctly, you say that the way we use computers today and the way we use software in particular, is the root cause of all the societal problems you enumerated? I guess that we'll all need more to be convinced and share your perspective. 

xvz8: of course and to answer your question: yes, this is the root but not the only cause and I will explain why as simply as I can so bear with me. By now, you must have realized that technology is helping billions of people connect together, wherever they are on the planet. These connections and the presence of a nearly ubiquitous network of portable computing devices has paved the way for instant exchanges, reactions and collaboration. This has transformed your society in the past few decades, for the better and the worst. We have identified computing as the main culprit for the many problems listed above because of its capacity to bring people together, for good or bad reasons. It is also a critical aspect of wealth concentration, supporting produce cost reductions, automating jobs out and maximizing corporate profits. It has also disrupted most financial markets and amplified the capacity of big players to manipulate them, too often leaving most small retail investors in a losing position. 
But beyond computing as a facilitator or amplifier of these social problems, the way hardware engineers thought about software has shaped a profound way of thinking about software itself that, while completely misaligned with your modern computing needs, is still used everywhere and promoted by large corporations, milking the world and maintaining this sub-optimal computing paradigm for profits. 

**jht**: ok, so you say that the way we conceive software, from a hardware engineer perspective, is flawed and exacerbating these problems?

**xzv8**: exactly! Excuse my reaction, but in our time, few assumed that you would understand my points. We have a negative bias against non-augmented minds but surely this is inherited from our own biological human population, which is less and less well educated. 

**jht**: thank you. That's very interesting. I don't want to distract you from your explanation, but I'm very interested to learn more about humans in your time. 

**xzv8**: Hopefully, we'll have some time later on to discuss my society and maybe give you a glimpse of how things are in my time for humans. But let's stick with our computing paradigm issue. 
Like I was saying, the way to understand computing right now is through the perspective of the early hardware engineers who were looking at computing from the perspective of a single computer. They had a problem to solve, mostly, how to avoid rewriting code over and over again and make it portable between multiple computers. Initially, everything was so manual and tedious, directly programming the hardware components using very low-level tools. Just adding two numbers was a feat! So they started figuring out ways of abstracting things up, of encapsulating complexity and isolating each computer's internal details from the software they were writing. So, I'm not saying that they did a bad job, quite the opposite, but they solved a problem with the tools they have and the perspective they had at the time. So from the start, software was analog to programs, which we executed in the context of a single computer. These programs had to be stored on magnetic media (ultimately!) to be shared and executed on multiple computers and at this point, maybe inspired by the music industry, people started to see software as a discrete product. Something that is created once, copied infinitely and distributed like any other industrial products. 
The next natural step was to figure out a way to connect these individual computers together and, because they were often made by different vendors, a generic set of protocols and interfaces were (ultimately) designed and standardized around the concept of network. But this network paradigm is all caused because each computer is a discrete product, with a unique serial number, just like your car or any of your appliances. You've evolved your computing paradigm around a hardware-centric network, where software can communicate but is fundamentally executed inside a single computer, with very limited knowledge of the world beyond its bare metal reality. 
This caused many inefficiencies that were coped with using various workarounds, better processes, better tools, faster networks, all of this adding complexity, cost, specializations and fragility to the software ecosystem. Everyone was more than happy to sell its part. Operating system vendors that have kept the same core principles for more than 50 years, selling new hardware features with bells and whistles to beat the competition. Universities are happy to teach the same old course instead of being forced to question the fundamental principles of what they are teaching. Happy tool vendors, happy consulting companies, happy, happy industry!
The net result today is that you still live in an offline computing paradigm where software is built, designed based on a snapshot of reality in the form of requirements that are more and more complex to gather as software solutions include multiple persons or even  organizations. You get a fragmented set of incompatible data, essentially owned by application vendors and the greater the number of applications you consume, the work you must put to integrate these contexts, make sense of cross-app data, protect your privacy and identity and a tons of other problems where you waste your time, trying to fit a circle into a square to keep the pace of your personal and professional lives. 
If you just stop a few minutes to think about it, humans are treated like second-class citizens, consuming mostly pre-built visuals, provided based on the profitability and strategy of the application vendor and based on a general sense of user priority. This is central planning at its worst. You are completely dependent on software vendors to get you the right tool, otherwise, you need to improvise, use low-semantic tools like emails, chat to create ad-hoc collaboration processes, a great waste of time, money and ingenuity. 
The cost of maintaining this illusion of progress is quickly becoming too big for most people and organizations to support. So we regress into fitting our needs into pre-built solutions to reduce the cost, slow down innovation, apply the same strategy to various industries, etc. With security issues created by the sheer number of boundaries, data duplication, no strong identity and no common semantic of the application network you work with, your society slowly drift into more complex problems than what your computing paradigm can solve. 
Take content authenticity. This is a problem that you can't easily fix because content is duplicated and you don't have an easy way to track authors or the chain of people that have modified it before it reached your eyeballs. This is all caused because you think about content using your offline lenses. You don't realize that you build content before distributing it, just like you build a music song, a movie before some can consume it. But this build step is from an offline era, a world where artifacts are copied and distributed, just like the industrial products driving your consumption economy. You are stuck in your offline jail, shackled to your fake and duplicated content and your mentally integrated data model. You can think that you are very advanced with your smaller and smaller devices, but you just increase the noise and make the problem bigger with every prebuilt content that is published. 

**jht**: That's a very interesting perspective and seriously, I never stopped to think about it this way! So even if we are connected, we still mostly use offline or prebuilt content. Even apps are prebuilt and I must wait for the next release for this and that feature. ok, but is it really that big of a problem? I understand that it causes waste and the fact that everything is offline means that we can't really track content from its creation, but these are kind of technical issues, no? How could it cause all the social problems you were talking about earlier? 

**xzv8**: I understand that it's hard to establish causation links between everything that I just told you and most social problems you're experiencing, but believe me, there is a direct link. My goal is to show you the way and I guess that your brightest minds will be able to fill-up the blanks. For my part, I'd like to move to the second part of this issue, which is to help you understand the paradigm you need to support your modern society and help minimize social issues that will only pour oil on existing fires around the world. 
The solution is to treat each human (and other actors) as a software system, not as an external user but as a component of the system itself and change the perspective from hardware device to actor-centric computing. 

**jht**: that's not what we do now? We have multiple devices syncing and sharing my data? I'm not sure I see the difference.

**xzv8**: The device is still the primary actor in your example. You are using more than one device and rely on the fact that device or app vendors agreed on a way to sync some of your content to ease your life. But each app you use has its own reality, is a data universe by itself, unless some pre-agreement was made to share some kind of core services like identity, storage and even some common semantics. But you are not a software system. You still mostly consume visual data, you can't easily create integration points, aggregate data from two or more applications and republish it to anyone interested. You're still a leaf in a fragmented tree of apps and isolated networked systems. What I'm talking about is that you need to be able to consume data and decide what visual (or other UX) you need to apply for your needs. You need to be able to mix and match this data and republish it in an endless reactive stream constantly changing as they world around you does. 
You need to stop thinking about computing devices and figure out a way to create a commoditized computing grid, just like the electrical grid, but to support your personal computing needs, wherever and whatever they may be. Computing is not a product, it's a service and it should be available everywhere if you are to elevate your society in the next century. You already have the global computer, you just need to stop mimicking the old offline computer model and evolve your paradigm into a seamless grid of specialized computing services. 
Imagine a world where humans are augmented. It makes no sense to buy an implant working only with Microsoft or Apple no? Would you trust an implant with an operating system that needs to be constantly patched and rebooted? These are totally impossible in your current paradigm and for them to appear and have the impact that you need going forward, you need to pave the way and virtually transform each human into an information system. The network is not between this and that computer, it becomes a network of actors, explicitly subscribed to data and services they provide to support your needs. No duplication, this is critical. 
Now imagine your 1st wave of AI actors joining your society (this is how you need to think about it from the start). In the current paradigm, they will have an enormous advantage compared to offline humans. They will be part of the system, able to react and collaborate in real time while humans wait for their report and visual form to appear on the screen. It's not that the 1st wave of intelligent digital actors will be smarter than most humans, far from it. Humans will still have the monopoly on the majority of complex intellectual tasks and the upper hand on everything but speed and depth of knowledge. But still, a relatively dumb digital actor will be able to replace an average human in a repetitive and even in many decision making situations because of its unfair advantage of how it is part of the system and not an external user. 
Even to help improve the 1st and 2nd generation of digital actors, having a fluid software model with high semantic and reactive data will greatly reduce the energy and time it takes to prebuilt inference models until they also become fluid by the 3rd generation. No more brute force feeding of raw data, no more energy issues slowing down your AI evolution. Rewiring your software mindset will have a deeper impact on your society than the personal computer had in the late 20th century. 

**jht**: very interesting indeed... It is really hard for me to imagine myself doing computing work without a computer, but I guess that if we just change the perspective and still use some kind of computing device to access our own personal system, it could work easily with the current technology. And if I think about virtual or augmented reality it is starting to make plenty of sense to become the system. So these changes would prevent us from being ejected from the system by the 1st wave of AI actors like you call them? 
xvz8: Not entirely but this would greatly reduce the negative impact and favor a more collaborative interaction between humans and digital actors, a little bit like how we work right now with our augmented human population. 

**jht**: ok I see. But for the rest of the issues? 

xvz8: very similar. If you're still in the system it means that the economy will be more stable and thus, less prone to extremism and political crises. If the content is fully authenticated because it is not duplicated and explicitly provided by a well-known actor, you cut a vast number of disinformation, privacy and security attacks and thus are able to have a more constructive social discussion, which is a fertile ground for more peace and scientific progress instead of violence, instability and ultimately wars. Even more, with actors consuming data directly, scientific researchers will have access to raw results without having to wait for the report and integrate them with other research or their own algorithm, or feed them to digital actors for specialized processing and more. Fluid software is so much more efficient and offers a solid foundation for your society. We still use this paradigm, with a few improvements, in my time. 

**jht**: ok, I can see the benefits of moving away from building things up offline and treating them as products. In what you describe, software is not a product and seems to be closer to a social network post on steroids where followers can access it. 
(short delay before answering)

**xzv8**: Sorry for the blink, I wasn't aware of this expression about steroids. It must not have aged well (with a quirky smile). It's a good image, but still very simplistic compared to the real fluid software, but yes, software is much more social because you interact with other actors, not only humans but organizations, devices, systems and smart agents. 

**jht**: but what about the actual computer manufacturers? How do they get paid for creating computers? 

xvz8: they don't create computers as discrete products anymore. I can't go into all the technicalities of the way your world will figure out fluid software, but they mostly become computing providers and get paid per usage or through service subscriptions. There are many models, but at the end of the day, a computer will exist and not be owned by individuals, shared maybe based on the location or the type of features required. You already have a similar approach with what you call cloud computing, but instead of trying to recreate a flawed offline approach in the cloud, they will provide services to support fluid software and let you assemble your own unique system. 

**jht**: So everyone has it's own system? 

**xzv8**: this is another benefit. Each system is unique, created from consumed services published by other actors. So no need to survey dozens of users to understand their reality and create a complex system on that partial snapshot of reality. This is much closer to what you do with emails and other messaging tools. You let processes and workflows emerge and adapt them as new need arise. It's way easier and cheaper for a single person to understand its needs at a specific point in time than to orchestrate a large system with dozens of hardcoded workflows... Much more natural for everyone involved. 
I don't think we need to go into more details here, the ideas expressed should be enough to align your efforts and help the ecosystem steer away from offline artifacts. Let's keep the discussion moving and maybe dig a little bit deeper into the challenges around your democracies, how they affect your society trajectory and how this fluid software can help improve the outcome and keep power into the people's hands. 
