# Democracy

> Bring back the real voice of the people, it is mandatory to return to a bright future 


**jht**: So Xavier, you seem to imply that if we stick with our current "offline" (with air quotes) computing paradigm that there will be a net negative effect on our democracies and societies in general. Am I summarizing it right?
xvz8: There will be more than a simple negative impact, in fact, your naive computing approach will destroy your democracies and you will have to live through an era of fascism that will trigger a series of bloody wars, with a moderate risks that your civilization might never fully recover, due to residual climate, population and education effects of these decades. As I said, the disinformation will only get worse but climate migrations, economic downturns and national debts pushing inflation higher will also trigger civil unrest and fuel the rise of dictators with clean and easy solutions, usually targeting one group as the main culprit. In your current paradigm, you will be able to create your 1st generation of digital persons, which will also accentuate many economic trends and eject a number of active humans from the system. I'm not even talking about all the bad ways these new technologies will be used to support nationalist agendas.
Your democracies are already fragile and constantly targeted by more authoritarian regimes, again using weaknesses in our computing paradigm to spread disinformation and other ways to manipulate public opinion. Let's go through the current democratic situation in most advanced economies and see how this dark trajectory might occur, its links to your naive computing paradigm and other growing stressors like climate impacts, AI emergence or high inflation and government defensive spendings. I will point out a few underlying critical factors that might not be directly observable but that will push your systems in the wrong direction very soon. 

**jht**: but before we dive too much into your vision of our democracies. Don't you think that we could discuss scientific discoveries or how your 3rd or 4h generation sparkians have been created? Like you said, we don't have much time and I am trying to avoid being sidetracked for too long. 

**xzv8**: don't worry, I understand. But unless you solve fundamental issues like putting in place a new computing paradigm and a new democratic model ASAP, you won't live long enough for the rest to happen. You have to understand that my goal is to help you take a more direct path to reach the stars and push your understanding of the universe further. But, as I will discuss next, your geopolitical trajectory is on a war, destruction and ignorance path and you need to reverse this first. 

**jht**: you sound ominous... It's hard to envision that things will go so badly.  

**xzv8**: they will be bad, how bad depends on many decisions you have to make in the next few years. That's the whole reason for my presence here tonight, to shine some lights towards some solution areas that will have the most positive impacts on your future. So let's see how we can improve the chances of your democratic governments to survive and we'll turn to geopolitics and science in a few minutes. 

**jht**: sounds like a plan. 

xvz8: In fact I don't want to talk about obvious corruption or social dysfunction issues but instead, I want to put in the spotlight those issues that are slowly dragging your societies toward fascism, nationalism and simplistic solutions to complex problems, leading to war and destruction. I also want to describe a model that has been proven to be more antifragile for societies in my own history. 
The first issue is the fact that societies are more and more complex, with every citizen on a distinct trajectory instead of the larger groups that were more easily targeted in the mid-20th century. You can group a few similar trajectories like college-graduated or urban versus rural ones, immigrants versus main population members, etc. But overall, trends are that people's lives are way more varied and complex than they were for your grand-parents. The multiplication of personal trajectories gives rise to more and more trajectory collisions in your society, which create frustration and so many other negative feelings. So you need to realize that representative democracy is dead as representatives are usually elected for false reasons, ideological issues, the need for change or through a popularity contest. The fact that no single policy can solve a majority of issues from a majority of personal trajectories creates discontentment as people only look through their personal lenses, no the greater good. In fact, the notion of greater good has become so complex that not even the brightest minds can figure it out. This is a typical chaos problem where an artificial orderly structure is put over the underlying chaotic system of trajectories and ambitions. It might be able to contain the chaos for a while, creating an illusion of stability, like a calm ocean before a storm, but don't get fooled, this is an illusion and the storm will destroy the orderly structure with sheer destruction. 

**jht**: so the structure you're talking about is our institutions is that it?

xvz8: partially yes, but it's also all the cultural expectations and the way you see your society that is included in this ordered portrait of your reality. Get a job, buy a house, pay your taxes and hope that you won't get shot and have enough money to spend your old years on a beach.
**jht**: understood. So what you're saying is that, because of the multiplication of personal trajectories, the inherent chaos of our society is growing exponentially  faster than our institutions or even our social imagination of a good life? 

**xzv8**: Yes and, for the sake of our discussion, our political system too. Having a single party, with a single representative speaking for a group of people based on regionality is archaic and will create more and more tensions as no single answer, policy or decision can answer even partially, everyone's perceived problems. 

**jht**: I note the accent on perceived... so our political system is not precise enough to find solutions for even a decent minority of people and even worst, people don't always understand their real problems, which makes everything even worst

**xzv8**: yes and this is where disinformation and social engineering comes into play and why your social computing systems are more effective than a nuclear bomb at disrupting and discrediting everything that is related to a democratic government, which gradually takes roots in some frustrated circles and gradually become a real problem for everyone. People lose confidence in their institutions and feed the underlying chaos and put even more pressure on the ordered systems harnessing it. Because these systems were never really created with change or evolution in mind, the only possible outcome is a complete or partial collapse of the system, usually associated with violence and more losers than winners. 
The other, more subtle, issue related to declining institution confidence and the general and growing misalignment of the system compared to the underlying chaotic truth, is the fact that young people stop believing in the society, in others and focus on their own little success, even at the expense of others, which is doubly destructive. I'm not saying that everyone should invest half his time doing free work here, but in the waste of bright minds on tasks that aren't building the common future, just more money for a single person.

**jht**: I'm not sure I understand. Isn't it the nature of our capitalist system to motivate everyone to pursue personal success and that, eventually, this success will trickle down in our society and everyone will be better off?

**xzv8**: That's why I'm saying that this one is more subtle but equally destructive. The decline in confidence doesn’t affect the individual desire to improve his life, quite the opposite actually. It gradually influences him to stop contributing to the society, put less effort and this is happening at every level of the society. It means that services like education and healthcare get negatively affected, having disproportionated negative impacts on the older and younger citizens. This will eventually affect the capacity of a society to solve problems through science as fundamental research, the one that is not directly generating income, is left aside and citizens choose jobs with less social value-added and more personal income gains. 

**jht**: so, they are less interested in democracy and I would guess that they are somewhat more of a right-wing ideology if they don’t believe in common investments?

**xzv8**: ultimately yes, not always. This has the effect of devaluing the perspective of social contributions, devaluing governments as an ineffective taxation overhead. Like I said, this self-interested behavior is normal, but in a dysfunctional democracy, it will initially be accompanied by gradual right-wing values, then by a disinterest in voting and ultimately by a gradual ejection of the system, feeding the vicious democratic degradation circle even more as years pass by. This affects not just poor or fringe citizens, but also our most brilliant minds, with much more widespread impacts on innovation, on cohesion and on political representatives quality, which also put pressure on the quality and legitimacy of all democracies.  

**jht**: so you started with what you call our computing naivety, which favor disinformation and give an amplified voice to various anti-democratic voice, which in turn gradually bring a disinterest at every level of the society, which is expressed by more personal gain effort at the expense of social contributions, which fuel the vicious circle of the degradation of all our institutions, which in turn fuel the bad behavior, bad education and the democracy is spinning in an abyssal decent.

**xzv8**: good summary John Taylor. reversing this negative feedback loop is very hard as institutions are losing credibility and thus, the capacity to positively influence people. And I must say that your chosen representatives are also subject to the decay, often thinking more about themselves, assuming that the whole democratic experiment could fall at every turn anyway. When your youngest generation has no ambition to improve the society, having always lived in the relative comfort provided by stable and functioning institutions, favoring money-generating positions like stock markets, crypto startups, luxury goods or spend their time traveling. If you look closely around you, most social needs have been filled through immigration, those people having experienced firsthand the need for a strong community against real dysfunctional and corrupted  institutions. There are so many factors that contribute to the fall of modern democracies in the coming years, I won’t go into everyone. I will add that your first generation of digital workers will not help as it will push enough people out of their jobs, increasing corporate profits and fueling the ambient frustration even more, ultimately ejecting more and more people from the democratic process. This is where fascism gains traction with simple and clear solutions, usually resulting in violence and rebellion. Desperate people relying on a strong man to bring back an idealized past, using any necessary means… 

**jht**: You can’t just give us this dark analysis and not provide a path forward to save our democratic societies? What happened in your timeline? You told us that you ultimately tried another model with more success?

**xzv8**: Well, my timeline is filled with human and even AI wars, to use a term you will understand. This is the reason why I’m trying to express the urgency to act and hopefully, you’ll avoid a few wars and put in place a real democracy before it’s too late. For me, the new model was put in place after a few decades of war and another few decades of regional isolation, every remaining country licking its wounds. 

**jht**: so not very rosy on your end too! So what is this model that ultimately brought stability in your timeline? 

**xzv8**: Actually, we applied our modern knowledge of computing, software engineering and antifragile systems to invest in new, more adaptable ways for democracy to emerge and transform over time, based on the identified needs. All your current economic and democratic systems are static, having rules written a few centuries ago and while they were surely good rules at the time, we’ve understood that everything is in constant change and democratic institutions must be light and adaptable too. There are many variations of this new system, most of them based on the same core principles. 
One of these principles is to keep political units very small, down to a single family or social unit (for digital persons). These units individually identify their priorities, supported by advanced software (our definition not yours!). These needs are rolled-up locally, regionally and ultimately in a global system. Each unit will determine their contributions and receive credits for their identified needs. This is a complex budgeting system analog to barter, but with efficient delivery rules and money equivalent for those unable or unwilling to physically contribute. In summary, family units vote with their needs, selecting among a number of regulated service providers, the one that offers the best value for this year's needs. 

**jht**: That sounds very complicated. Millions of families dictating government budget priorities? Consensus must be very hard to reach!

**xzv8**: in fact, there is no consensus, so single voice or program. The list of available services is regulated by the executive branch of the government, but the delivery of these services is left to a regulated but open market. There is competition in what is now government services. If a provider doesn’t offer enough services, the unit has all rights to choose another one in the next budget cycle. But before you tell me that this is not possible, I have to assure you that having smaller units deciding for themselves instead of a single group of representatives trying to create policies and services for everyone’s problems, it is way easier for a family unit to identify services that will improve its life than finding those that fit for millions of people. 

**jht**: You’re describing a federation of families. I agree that this is very resilient and having some free market forces must keep government expenses in check. I still don’t understand the whole mechanics, but let’s assume that 
this is working. How do these families elect their government, the executive branch that you described. If there are no representatives, who are they? 

**xzv8**: Actually, you won’t believe me, but they are randomly selected among all participating family units! No election! It was proven that having a good representation of normal people was as good and even better than professional politicians. The idea is that this is not fully random as there are various representation rules like at least 35% male, 35% female, 35% digital, various ratios for races, ages and regions. They are nominated permanently, but close to 4% are removed every 6 months (may vary). The net result is very low corruption and a group of 125 normal people doing their best to regulate the system, including tracking and controlling expenses and the quality of all suppliers in all service branches. 

**jht**: interesting. It’s a little bit like a jury! larger, but the same process. Even better, having them possibly removed at any time will surely reduce corruption to a minimum. It will also reduce the impact of a negative or destructive nomination to a minimum. So they form the executive branch and they are just regulating the various social services, not delivering these services to family units, right? 

**xzv8**: exactly. And most executive groups allocate a committee for each service so that no single person can take any decision. This has worked very well for close to 50 years now in my timeline. 

**jht**: If I hear you correctly, you are saying that our path to a better future is through not just reforming but reinvesting our democratic system and our institutions in a way that there are no elections but people use their money to vote on the service they need?

**xzv8**: You need to find a way to decentralize governmental services and remove representativity based on popular contests you call elections. An asymmetric model of services with some builtin free market forces will greatly reduce frustrations and will let your system constantly realign to the underlying chaotic reality. Less pressure will build up and ultimately, this provides more stability and better lives for everyones involved. It is again much more complex than that, but this summary should be enough for all of you to figure out an efficient path. Evolving your computing approach and reforming your democracies is a very good start in avoiding the worst of your next century obstacles, but there are a few other things you need to consider. Let’s talk about geopolitics a bit. 
