# Geopolitics

> Your future is on a war path, you can't avoid it 


xzv8: very few people in your present realize the reasons why your society has had a very strong economic performance in the past 25 years and even more. Yes, it’s because of globalization, particularly the exploitation of different economies, low-cost workers helping to reduce costs and maintain corporation profits, with limited innovation needed. Everything you consume today would be much more expensive if not for cheap asian manufacturing capacity and the relative security of global transport routes. But nothing can be kept in equilibrium eternally and as economic gaps are closed between rich and poor(er) countries, you end up with higher costs, higher inflation and the population is feeling more and more the reduction in buying power. The problem is that most corporations got lazy, innovation budgets have been cut and now, with the global supply chain at risk, they don’t have any plan B to continue their growth. 

My point is that this gives you a feeling that globalization has failed, nationalist politicians use this perceived failure as arguments for their isolationist policies, brandishing most local jobs and a better life for the worker class. This will never happen again and they know it. Without globalization, your modern life is over. No one will have enough money to buy a locally-made nationalist smartphone! And this will only put a strong inflationary force on all your prices, initiating a vicious circle that will spiral into more civil unrest and discontentment. Government will spend more to keep the peace and absorb part of the growing costs caused by limited globalization, which will also put pressure on prices. High prices mean less children too, causing an inverted demographic pyramid, putting more pressure on government revenues and spendings. 

jht: seriously, you’re getting more and more joyful as the interview goes! If I hear you, everything we do leads to civil unrest, broken democracy and fascism…

xzv8: I told you that the path ahead was dark and complex and that, with only very strong leadership and radically new ideas would you be able to control these destructive forces and minimize their negative impacts. All of you got way too complacent, too busy achieving personal emancipation, relying on aging institutions and assuming that they would never change. The underlying chaos is strong and cannot be contained, not for a country, not for a planet and not for the universe. You lived the past 60 years within an illusion of stability that started with a majority of people benefiting from it, but as time goes, less and less people generate profits and more and more are exploited by a smaller minority. Chaos destroys the weak first, until the weak join forces and break the orderly structure to survive. 

jht: that has been your fundamental point all along. We create static ordered systems or structures and we don’t evolve them fast enough for many good and bad reasons. What you’re saying is that the reality underneath this “order illusion” will bite us in the ass if we don’t recreate new structures. 

xzv8: yes, this is one of the primary teachings that I want to share during this interview. Your species has done great things, but as the complexity of your reality increases, your reflex is to order. Initially, everyone knew that the order was just a thin veneer above the raw chaotic forces, but as people rely more and more on these abstractions, as education quality decreases, as hyper-specialization increases, you end up thinking that these structures are your reality. You’ve put a storm in a box that is about to explode and possibly brings you back decades back in your quality of life, progress and technology accessibility. 
Let’s complete the geopolitics picture quickly so that we can think about what can be done to minimize the upcoming destruction. So globalization is attacked from all sides, rich countries getting less for their investments and poorer countries getting richer, with people wanting more than just a good job at the shop. This rebalance of forces is breaking globalization and changing the whole political and economical dynamics of your world. Some would argue that this is for the better, as exploitation of poor people has been a recurring theme in advanced nations history. It would have been if instead of being greedy, corporate leaders had invested in post-globalization strategies in time. But now, these de-investments are shaking countries' diplomacy, reopening old wounds and gradually reshaping the alliances. There’s no turning back. Unless radical changes are made in capitalism and economic policies of advanced countries, war is the only outcome as chaotic forces must be released to set the table for new ordered structures.
In the coming years, you have many aggravating forces coming into play. The most important one is the climatic system destabilization and its numerous direct and indirect consequences. 
