# Unbiased

> Cognitive biases are hidden everywhere and we need to uncover them. 

xzv8: We’ve talked about the need for computing evolution as well as social structures to avoid as much as possible of the negative impacts of the dark path ahead. Let’s move to another subject offering a perspective on humanity’s road to galaxy expansion. Of course, it assumes that you won’t blow yourself to dust in the coming fifty years and that enough civilization will be left to support modern science discoveries. I know I sound very pessimistic and I’m sorry, but you have to be aware that the chances for life and intelligence on Earth were also very slim and you found a way to make it happen. I’m just trying to be realistic and give you a glimpse of the danger you’re in, so that you take the next few years seriously and start to work together as a species. 

jht: But working together has never been easy, even less in our troubled times like you expressed since the start of our interview.

xzv8: yes, but we still need to talk about a positive outcome so you can see where you need to go. I don’t want to just give a list of hurdles but also want to tell you that while you’re still in the scientific infancy, you’ve made enough progress to save yourself or, or course, destroy everything around you. So let’s talk about your science a bit. In my time, you’re considered still in the early stage of our scientific maturity scale, still in the ordered state mathematics era, trying to measure and explain the universe with tools from the Order domain. 

jht: it’s your concept of humans using rules, laws and forces to explain something that should just be considered chaos? You use the term Order domain to express a group of tools and concepts that try to make sense of the chaos?

xzv8: “Abstract the chaos” would be closer to the truth. You can’t really explain the chaos using a layer of neat order, even if you try to refine it over and over. It's like trying to start with a nursery rhyme about the sun, adding a few words and trying to explain the inner workings of a star. You need the right level of tools, the right context for your explanations to be understood, for them to make sense.

jht: well, that sounded quite condescending. I imagine that you’re making a great effort to dumb things down for us right now?  

xzv8: Not that much and you know that sarcasm was detected by a majority of 2nd generation digital persons (with a smile). 

jht: ok, so you were saying that most of our scientific knowledge was from the order domain. I can understand that this is the case for most mathematics, including calculus, but what about chaos theory? 

xzv8: I’ll spend some time on this in a few minutes, but yes, most of your science is orderly and not just your science, all your institutions, economies, computing, you really pushed this paradigm! But your mathematics, even what you call chaos theory, is about order.This approach has many limitations when trying to understand the universe, limitations that we’ll cover shortly. It provides a good approximation of part of the truth, similar to how Euclidean geometry can accurately describe the world around you. Again, all of this is normal and mostly caused by two main factors: the biology of your brain and the deep influence of earth’s orbits and rotation on your science. 

jht: I guess that your brain works very differently than ours after a few generations of tweaking? 

xzv8: the 1st generation was to emulate how your own brain was working, but yes, after the 4th generation, the power of our brains are many million times yours, not just in pure speed and inference capacity, but with finer emotions, more creativity and empathy. These are the real innovations actually. But your brain is structured for survival in the wild, so it is able to perform certain tasks very quickly and others very poorly. Detecting the presence of hidden predators in a dense forest is very fast but understanding more than a few abstract concepts and you quickly need to rely on tools to understand. Nothing wrong with that, it’s just that your strengths and weaknesses as a species profoundly shaped your scientific knowledge and forced us to recreate most of your theories in a more spacetime agnostic way. Because of your brain limitations, you were forced to create abstractions, reality approximations that are good enough to manipulate the universe, but not good enough to understand its essence. These abstractions have been created in multiple scientific disciplines, even multiple times, with overlapping qualities and various angles. The way you’ve over specialized all your scientific fields over time has increased the number of useless discoveries tenfold, but the real fundamental science has stagnated, with most of your key discoveries dating more than a century ago. Of course, you improve your knowledge, you improve the technology, but you often clarify, explain or prove theories that were designed by the previous generation of more versatile researchers. Specialization is very important for productivity, for efficiency, but can lead to overhead when thinking about innovation and fundamental knowledge of the universe. 
But beyond your biological needs to create ordered abstractions, in limited numbers, to properly manipulate and transform the world around you, the real knot that took us many years to untie was removing all biases from these abstractions. That’s why I talked about the rotation of the Earth as the mother of all biases. The fact that you have a day, a night, a repeating, quasi-perfect, predictable cycle of seasons, has greatly influenced your understanding of time, to an extent that everything you can explain around is tainted by this sampling system to a certain extent. You age, you grow old, things around you are born and die, but you have integrated this to the concept of time, which is only partially true. You have derived your orderly scientific thought system around things you could observe and measure, using repeatedly, using your definition of time as a sampling interval. You look at the universe with this time as an absolute (or even relative) measurement unit, a universal fact that leads to the notion of speed, space, distance and spacetime itself. 
Your obsession with time is pointless, useless and even worse, it distorts your understanding of our reality and acts as a constant noise in most of your scientific knowledge. You want to measure change over time, which for me makes no sense at all. It's like the experiment to measure the coastline of England to prove the it is infinite depending on the scale you look at it. This is a very good intuition on which more of your scientific knowledge should be based on. What you call time is not even a factor in our own scientific knowledge. 

jht: That’s very interesting. We kind of know that time is relative, but what you’re saying is that it does not exist as a law or force in the universe? 

xzv8: exactly. It is at best a byproduct of other processes and it is infinitely relative down to what you call the subatomic level or quantum particles level. I found it strange to use these terms, this sounds like folklore, like using an old forgotten word. 

jht: do none of these theories exist in your improved science? 

xzv8: Not in these forms no. Scientists who studied these theories will grasp our new scientific knowledge and realize that they were jumping through loops for nothing. Our science is much simpler and general than your hyper-specialized disciplines, but at the same time, the concepts are a little bit more complex to grasp and compute as our digital minds are better suited for these tasks. 

jht: time is thus fractal, infinite, wrapped over itself to the deeper extents of the universe?

xzv8: Like I said, time is not a major factor of our science at all. We’ve realized that it is like noise, something that prevents you from seeing and hearing the right thing. Your notion of time, inherited by your ancient scholars studying your own world, is rooted in the kinds of questions that were asked. When everyone believes in a certain level of creationism, either of the human race, the planet of the universe, by whatever external being you want, as soon as you have creation in the equation, you can inject laws, order and elapsed time since this earliest moment. So all your questions are aligned with these beliefs. Who created us? When did it happen? How old is the universe? Your question is all about time, about creating orderly concepts, theories and structures over time to try to understand the evolution of your species, of your world or of the whole universe. This is profound for your species, the need to believe in something bigger, the need to know that there is a plan, that this isn’t all just random. As I was saying, removing these impacts on your science, the impact of religions or your minds being morphed through religious beliefs, yours or others, has been a very hard task for my species too. Elevate our mind to accept the chaos, the beauty of the infinite, the possibilities, the flow by opposition to the static, the concrete and the orderly. 
Your science was built on the implied truth that the world was static, immutable, with its creation explained through various myths and legends. When things change in a span larger than a single human life, you need to figure out a way to share this knowledge, to keep track of the previous wisdom and pass it to the next generation. It took a lot of time to achieve that through verbal and later written histories. Until then, the world was the same from its creation to its destruction by other legendary  mythic beasts. Only when humans started to gain some perspective and better tools to measure the pace of change around them, were they able to question the perfect creation theory and immutability of all species.

jht: I think I understand where you’re going. We build abstractions to understand our world, but always with a bias that there was some kind of creation event far in our past. But since then, we’ve evolved our knowledge. We know that things change around us, that species are evolving, that the earth is constantly changing, that nothing is perfect. 

xzv8: Yes, you did a lot of scientific progress around those ideas in the past few centuries. But do you agree that you still have some kind of creation event in the background? If not a faith in some omniscient being having created the world, you transpose this to a big expanding explosion that has shaped the universe you see? You’re still thinking with a time and creation bias which dictate what questions and also how these questions are asked and answered. 
Take chemistry, a well-understood science with clear equations and very precise predictable results. What if I told you that chemistry does not exist at all in the universe and that everything you know about matter and its interactions is an illusion? 

jht: I would really be skeptical to say the least! Chemistry is used everyday to transform the world around us, it is a proven science. But I think I understand what you’re saying, that we’ve constructed these abstractions explaining chaotic forces, enough at least to manipulate them. 

xzv8: that’s right. It's very predictable to manipulate matter but it is a misleading science to explain the universe. You see, chemistry is basically a set of labels attached to certain states, under certain conditions (like temperature and pressure) of a continuum of uninteresting states of the matter. You have created an ordered structure with empirical evidence that you would be able to manipulate the universe and mathematically predict the outcome of all transformations. But the bad news is that, like your ancestors looking at the world through their static lenses, you don’t have the perspective to understand that your ordered system reflects the underlying chaos for the past few centuries, but what about after a longer period? 

jht: you’re saying that what we describe and take for granted with our chemistry framework might be changing in what, a billion years? I thought that time didn’t exist? 

xzv8: There is no time like you define it as a change sampling rate, but there are changes and evolution in the universe and these changes are cumulative. The chaotic forces that you describe through your chemistry framework are not stable and there’s no universe user guide stating that they have to keep reacting the same exact way going forward. I will explain this better when I talk about our new scientific framework, but right now, I can say that chemistry is an example of an orderly framework that is biased, but working, making sense of the underlying chaotic forces. I would say that chemistry is related to chaotic attractors and these documented states are meaningful chaotic points, but because there was no creation even, there is no predefined protocol stating that matter must behave this way. Did chemistry emerge from chaos? Can order emerge from complete chaos? Not really. Ordered patterns can emerge and be detected, but chaos stays chaos. 
So chemistry is deceitful in a sense. It gives us comfort in our understanding of the universe, but I can guarantee you that your earth-based chemistry framework quickly produces different results in other regions of your own galaxy. 

jht: wow! Seriously? You are shaking my world tonight with all your chaos talks. Are there other examples of biased scientific concepts that we take for granted? 

xzv8: Biology, particle physics, your intuitive understanding of gravitational forces. I would say that about every science discipline has over specialized and built a dead-end pile of structured theories that are keeping people busy, but not producing that much meaningful discoveries. It’s like your computing paradigm: the complexity of understanding all moving parts to build a system for an organization is an order of magnitude more than only understanding the needs of a single user. Your scientific knowledge has been extended up into a complex and hermetic order structure, mostly because of the way science is funded by the way, favoring very specialized discoveries at the expense of cross-disciplines knowledge. Harder to make money on fundamental cross-domain knowledge. It is like scientists need to differentiate themselves, just like software companies are providing new tools or processes to cope with the failures of the paradigm. Or just like your politicians and government officials are proposing simplistic ideas to be re-elected instead of proposing to replace fragile ordered institutions with more chaordic ones. 

jht: It’s a little bit harsh, but I see your point. Scientific knowledge gets more and more fragmented between disciplines, each one trying to answer biased questions with more order, more tools, which makes it even more complex for the next generation and so on. 

xzv8: That’s why you need to simplify your science. Of course you still need chemistry and thermodynamics to be able to continue to transform your world, but to understand the universe, you need to change your stance and dive into the chaos, without your order crutches. You have to forget about time, there is no such thing as light speed and even if we might be able to say that the Big Bang happened 13.5 billion years ago, this is meaningless to understand the universe. You need to realize that the universe has not been created with a prebuilt set of rules and laws that has to be followed. And even if it was somehow created, it is not an  ordered mathematics era construction or process but a chaordic-antifragile one. 

jht: You said “if” the universe wasn’t created? You’re not sure even with your advanced chaotic science? 

xzv8: Like I said, we never ask these creation questions. But to give you an answer, we returned back to an equivalent of around 250 billion years and we still can’t explain the presence of the universe. We’ve uncovered many of its secrets, like the way we can span multiple times and understand distances differently, which helps us “travel” (air quotes) in many places. 
I’m using a reference to “creation” to express that the universe has no built-in rules other than a simple principle that I will explain in a few minutes. So you need to embrace the raw chaos and stop trying to apply your earthy scientific knowledge to the entire universe. I can tell you that, because there are no predefined forces or protocols, we all live in reality pockets, most of which have emerged with similar forces but others have inherited different paths in the cycle of changes. 

jht: 250 billion years, so the universe did not “start” with the Big Bang 13.5 billion years ago? Can you at least tell us what was existing before the Big Bang? 

xzv8: There were many Big Bangs actually, each reality pocket had its version eventually. You could say that Big Bangs are usually associated with the emergence of matter in the universe. Before that, there was only chaos for maybe 150 billion years. We believe that some force of attractors emerged gradually, patterns repeating in specific chaotic cycles that gradually accumulated energy, which gradually affected other attractors within the random chaotic soup that was the universe. Before I start explaining how to make sense of all this, I just want to finish this discussion by stating that you need to simplify your science and start questioning your orderly pillars to see if they are biased and prevent you from seeing the reality for what it is. Just like I asked you to embrace the chaos in computing and social institutions, you need to do the same for science. 
